# Saturday, November 28: Introduction to $\infty\dash$categories


Dealing with size issues: take a Grothendieck Universe $\mathcal{U}$: sets whose subsets are closed under all of the usual set operations (small).


:::{.definition title="$\infty\dash$Category"}
An $\infty\dash$category $\mathcal{C}$ is a (large) simplicial set $\mathcal{C}$ such that any diagram of the form

\begin{tikzcd}
	{\Lambda_i^n} && {\mathcal{C}} \\
	\\
	{\Delta_n}
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{\exists}"', from=3-1, to=1-3, dashed]
\end{tikzcd}

admits the indicated lift, where $\Lambda_i^n$ is an $i\dash$horn (a simplex missing the $i$th face) for $0 < i < n$.
:::


:::{.remark}
This is a specialized notion of a Kan complex, and in particular all $\infty\dash$categories are Kan complexes.
All inner horns are fillable, i.e. simplicial sets are *inner* Kan complexes.
Different to Kan complexes, which include all $i$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Functors between $\infty\dash$categories"}
A $\infty\dash$functor between two $\infty\dash$categories is a map between simplicial sets.
:::

:::{.definition title="Nerve of a category"}
Given an ordinary category $\mathcal{C}$, define the **nerve** of $\mathcal{C}$ to be the simplicial set given by
\[  
N(\mathcal{C})_n \da \ts{\text{Functors } F: [n] \to \mathcal{C}}
\]
where $[n]$ is the poset category on $\ts{1, 2, \cdots, n}$.
So an $n\dash$simplex is a diagram of objects $X_0, \cdots, X_n \in \Ob(\mathcal{C})$ and a sequence of maps.
This defines an $\infty\dash$category, and there is a correspondence
\[  
\correspond{\text{ Functors } F: \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}}
&\iff
\correspond{\infty\dash\text{Functors } \hat F: N(\mathcal{C}) \to N(\mathcal{D})}
.\]
Note that taking the nerve of a category preserves the usual categorical structure, since the objects are the 0-simplices and the morphisms are the 1-simplices.
:::



:::{.remark}
For $\mathcal{C}$ an $\infty\dash$category, we can define $\mathcal{C}_0$ to be the "objects" and $\mathcal{C}_1$ to be the "morphisms", although we don't have a good notion of composition yet.
There will be boundary map: a 1-simplex has two boundary points, i.e. two objects $a, b \in \mathcal{C}_0$, so we can think of this as a map $f: a\to b$ where $a = \del_1 f, b= \del_0 f$[^on_bd_notation]
are the first and second vertices respectively.
We'll also have "degeneracy" maps going up from $\mathcal{C}_0 \to \mathcal{C}_1$, which we should think of as assigning identity morphisms to objects, or conversely that the identity morphism is the degenerate 1-simplex at an object.

[^on_bd_notation]: This notation $\bd_i$ denotes the boundary operator that drops the $i$th vertex. 

:::

:::{.definition title="Equivalence of Morphisms"}
Given two morphisms $f, g: a\to b$ in an $\infty\dash$category, we say $f\homotopic g$ are **equivalent** iff there is a 2-simplex filling in the following diagram:

\begin{tikzcd}
    && {b}  \\
    &&      \\
{a} && {b}
\arrow["{\id_b}", from=1-3, to=3-3]
\arrow["{f}"{name=0}, from=3-1, to=1-3]
\arrow["{g}"', from=3-1, to=3-3]
\arrow[Rightarrow, from=0, to=3-3, shorten <=4pt, shorten >=4pt]
\end{tikzcd}
[Link to diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwyLCJhIl0sWzIsMCwiYiJdLFsyLDIsImIiXSxbMSwyLCJcXGlkX2IiXSxbMCwxLCJmIl0sWzAsMiwiZyIsMl0sWzQsMiwiIiwwLHsibGVuZ3RoIjo3MH1dXQ==)

:::

:::{.remark}
This turns out to be an equivalence relation.
Note that in an ordinary category, if two morphisms are equivalent then they are already equal.
:::

:::{.definition title="Composition of morphisms"}
For 1-simplices $f: a\to b, g:b\to c$, a **composition** of $f$ and $g$ is a 2-simplex $\sigma$ filling in the following diagram:
\begin{tikzcd}
	&& {b} \\
	\\
	{a} &&&& {c}
	\arrow["{f}", from=3-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{g}", from=1-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow["{\exists h}"' {name=0, inner sep=0}, from=3-1, to=3-5, dotted]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, from=0, to=1-3, shorten <=6pt, shorten >=6pt, "\sigma"]
\end{tikzcd}
[Link to diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwyLCJhIl0sWzQsMiwiYyJdLFsyLDAsImIiXSxbMCwyLCJmIl0sWzIsMSwiZyJdLFswLDFdLFs1LDIsIiIsMCx7Imxlbmd0aCI6NzB9XV0=)

In this case, $h \da \bd_1 \sigma$ and we write $h \homotopic g\circ f$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that we're not fixing a choice, but it is well-defined up to the equivalence relation we're using.
This is similar to how e.g. coproducts are not baked into the structure of a category, but are instead only well-defined up to canonical isomorphism -- and in fact, this characterization is sometimes preferable.
:::


:::{.definition title="Equivalences of objects"}
If $f: a\to b$ is a morphism in an $\infty\dash$category $\mathcal{C}$, then we say $f$ is an **equivalence** if there exists a morphism $g:b\to a$ such that $\id_a \homotopic g\circ f$ and $\id_b \homotopic f\circ g$.
This is equivalent to finding 2-simplices $\sigma, \sigma'$ that fill the following two diagrams:


\begin{tikzcd}
	&& {b} \\
	&&&&& {} \\
	{a} && {a} && {b}
	\arrow["{f}"{name=0}, from=3-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{\exists g}", from=1-3, to=3-3, dashed]
	\arrow["{\id_a}"', from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{\id_b}"{name=1}, from=1-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow["{\exists g}", from=3-5, to=3-3, dashed]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, "{\sigma}" description, from=0, to=3-3, shorten <=4pt, shorten >=4pt]
	\arrow[Rightarrow, "{\sigma'}" description, from=1, to=3-3, shorten <=4pt, shorten >=4pt]
\end{tikzcd}
[Link to diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMCwyLCJhIl0sWzIsMCwiYiJdLFsyLDIsImEiXSxbNSwxXSxbNCwyLCJiIl0sWzAsMSwiZiJdLFsxLDIsIlxcZXhpc3RzIGciLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJkYXNoZWQifX19XSxbMCwyLCJcXGlkX2EiLDJdLFsxLDQsIlxcaWRfYiJdLFs0LDIsIlxcZXhpc3RzIGciLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJkYXNoZWQifX19XSxbNSwyLCJcXHNpZ21hIiwxLHsibGVuZ3RoIjo3MH1dLFs4LDIsIlxcc2lnbWEnIiwxLHsibGVuZ3RoIjo3MH1dXQ==)

:::

:::{.remark}
This is close to what we'd require for an isomorphism in an ordinary category, but we now allow the compositions to only be "weakly equivalent" or homotopic to the identities.
:::

:::{.definition title="Functor Categories"}
For $\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}$ simplicial sets, we can define a simplicial set $\Fun(\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D})$ whose $n\dash$simplices are given by
\[  
\Fun(\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D})_n \da \ts{ \text{Simplicial maps} F: \mathcal{C} \cross \Delta^n \to \mathcal{D}}
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that the 0-simplices recover functors if these are ordinary categories.
If $\mathcal{D}$ is an $\infty\dash$category, then this functor category is again an $\infty\dash$category.

:::
